# [Ownership in Rust](https://youtu.be/VFIOSWy93H0)

- This is Rust's most unique feature ,and it enables Rust to make memory safety guarantees without needing a garbage collector.
- All programs have to manage the way they use a computer’s memory while running. Some languages have [_garbage collection_](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/garbage-collection-java/) that constantly looks for no longer used memory as the program runs; in other languages the programmer must explicitly allocate and free the memory. Rust uses a third approach: memory is managed through a system of ownership with a set of rules that the compiler checks at compile time. None of the ownership features slow down your program while it’s running.

## [Stack & Heap](https://youtu.be/_8-ht2AKyH4)

- Both the stack and the heap are parts of memory that are available to your code to use at runtime, but they are structured in different ways. The stack stores values in the order it gets them and removes the values in the opposite order.This is referred to as last in, first out. Think of a stack of plates: when you add more plates, you put them on top of the pile, and when you need a plate, you take one off the top. Adding or removing plates from the middle or bottom wouldn’t work as well! Adding data is called _pushing_ onto the stack, and removing data is called _popping_ off the stack.
- All data stored on the stack must have a known, fixed size. Data with an unknown size at compile time or a size that might change must be stored on the heap instead. The heap is less organized: when you put data on the heap, you request a certain amount of space. The operating system finds an empty spot in the heap that is big enough, marks it as being in use, and returns a pointer, which is the address of that location. This process is called _allocating on the heap_ and is sometimes abbreviated as just _allocating_. Pushing values onto the stack is not considered allocating. Because the pointer is a known, fixed size, you can store the pointer on the stack, but when you want the actual data, you must follow the pointer.

  - Think of being seated at a restaurant. When you enter, you state the number of people in your group, and the staff finds an empty table that fits everyone and leads you there. If someone in your group comes late, they can ask where you’ve been seated to find you.

- Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap because the operating system never has to search for a place to store new data; that location is always at the top of the stack. Comparatively, allocating space on the heap requires more work, because the operating system must first find a big enough space to hold the data and then perform bookkeeping to prepare for the next allocation.
- Accessing data in the heap is slower than accessing data on the stack because you have to follow a pointer to get there. Contemporary processors are faster if they jump around less in memory. Continuing the analogy, consider a server at a restaurant taking orders from many tables. It’s most efficient to get all the orders at one table before moving on to the next table.
  - Taking an order from table A, then an order from table B, then one from A again, and then one from B again would be a much slower process. By the same token, a processor can do its job better if it works on data that’s close to other data (as it is on the stack) rather than farther away (as it can be on the heap). Allocating a large amount of space on the heap can also take time.
- When your code calls a function, the values passed into the function (including, potentially, pointers to data on the heap) and the function’s local variables get pushed onto the stack. When the function is over, those values get popped off the stack.
- Keeping track of what parts of code are using what data on the heap, minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the heap, and cleaning up unused data on the heap so you don’t run out of space are all problems that ownership addresses. Once you understand ownership, you won’t need to think about the stack and the heap very often, but knowing that managing heap data is why ownership exists can help explain why it works the way it does.

## Ownership Rules

1. Each value in Rust has a variable that’s called its _owner_.
2. There can be only one owner at a time.
3. When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.

|                             | Pros                                                                                                                       | Cons                                                                                                                  |
| --------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Garbage Collection**      | &#183; Error Free\* <br> &#183; Faster write time                                                                          | &#183; No Control over memory <br> &#183; Slower and unpredictable runtime performance <br>&#183; larger Progeam size |
| **Manual Memory Mangement** | &#183; Control over memory <br> &#183; Faster runtime performance <br>&#183; Smaller Program size                          | &#183; Error Prone <br> &#183; Slower write time                                                                      |
| **Ownership**               | &#183; Control over memory <br> &#183; Error Free\* <br> &#183; Faster runtime performance <br>&#183; Smaller Program size | &#183; Slower Write Time.Learning Curve (Fighting with Borrower checker)                                              |
